[[goodman-1978-worldmaking]]
[[wolf-2012-imaginary-worlds]]

[[ong-2011]] writes "This reliance on frameworks that depend on global generalization has shaped metropolitan studies to such an extent that empirical heterogeneity, flux, and uncertainty tend to be subsumed under a minimal set of explanatory conditions."

This singular capitalist process-force is presumed to account for engineering urban status and fate throughout the world. Such schematic perspectives fail to enrich our understanding of particular challenges and solutions on the ground. The planet-of-slums approach, for instance, does not mention that Ibadan (Nigeria) and Nairobi (Kenya), for instance, have urban facilities and well-educated residents. Furthermore, the rapid demographic growth of cities in the former “third world” is resulting in more than the explosion of shantytowns. For instance, over the last decade, the world’s ten fastest-growing cities of more than a million people are found in greater Asian region. Four are located in China – Guangzhou, Chongqing, Nanjing, and Wuhan – and, together with Dubai, have become centers of turbocharged middle-class growth (Wall Street Journal, 2009). Thus, accelerated urban population growth may be attributed to the influx of dispossessed peasants and/or the rise of the middle classes – as, for example, in Mumbai (see Ananya Roy, Conclusion, this volume). Variations in class composition mean that one cannot attribute urban expansion to a single collectivity or homogenized demographic, such as slum-dwellers, nor can one characterize the great city as the paradigmatic site of a global revolutionary multitude (Hardt and Negri 2000). By the mid-century, over half of the population in Asia will be urbanized. Perhaps the one sure claim that can be made about the staggering weight of this phenomenon is the equally huge size of their carbon footprints, and the urgent need for all cities to reverse this planet of pollution (Shannon May, this volume).

Gayatri Spivak (1999) employs a concept of “worlding” that rejects the recuperation of subaltern subjects, thus moving postcolonial analysis away from the emphasis on subaltern subjects, political society, and street politics. Nevertheless, universal capitalist and postcolonial variants of neo-Marxism rely on singular logics of global change, focusing on homogenizing effects of capitalism and colonialism that are presumed to account for uniform conditions in a huge swath of cities throughout the world. (9)

Worlding and reworlding were articulated by Spivak (1999) in her postcolonial attempt to recuperate subaltern subjects through a rendering of the Heideggerian concept of “being in the world.” Hardt and Negri (2000) provide another structural Marxist view of world transformation through generalized class conflicts. They claim that “multitudes,” a globally disenfranchised working class collectivity produced through the contemporary workings of capitalism, are milling in the world’s cities to confront Empire. In a follow-up to Hardt and Negri, Rob Wilson (2004) proposes that a variety of counter-worlding tactics, including art, can challenge the universalizing ideology and materiality of planetary capitalism. He calls the aggregate of these tactics “worldings against Empire.” Such Marxist conceptualizations of worlding thus define a unified logic (class wars), set of agents (subalterns, working-class subjects, multitudes), and target (global capitalism) of world transformation. The everyday struggles of these special categories of historical actors are construed as coalescing, sooner or later, into a single counter-worlding movement against capital’s Empire.

[[lehuede-2024]] the decolonial option seeks to enable polycentric, noncapitalist and nonanthropocentric worlds. Mignolo advanced his reflections in the aftermath of the failed invasion of Iraq by the US (2003) and the Wall Street financial crisis (2008), two events that eroded the international leadership of the US and left room for countries such as China to emerge as world hegemons. While such events took place decades ago, more recent developments support Mignolo’s argument. Former US president Donald Trump’s slogan ‘Make America Great Again’ and ongoing controversies between the US and China regarding 5G infrastructure show that the geopolitical conjuncture discussed by Mignolo is still relevant today.


Foucault’s notion of milieu or social field (2007: 22–3), this notion of the production of emergent spaces from the flows of ideas, actions, and objects

Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari (1987) have suggested that in a world of flows, social formations emerge from the “rhizomatic” connections that cross-cut vertical integrated hierarchies (328–9). In this sense, worlding exercises are those lateralizing microprocesses that remap power by opening up new channels or reconfigure new social universes.

Bruno Latour (2005) notes that a social system is formed through “a provisional movement of new associations” that effects a continual change in its topography. Extrapolating from these theorists, worlding refers not to a single unified political process, but to diverse spatializing practices that mix and match different components that go into building an emergent system.

