
The “unhomeliness” of AI expands the postcolonial concept of “the unhomely” to describe the displacement experienced by many due to the accelerationism of generative AI. Originally a term describing the psychological crisis of diasporic identity forced to mix two cultures of which neither are “pure,” engendering a foreignness within the self (Bhaba 2013), “the unhomely” is now a condition also experienced by populations whose selfhood and social cultures are increasingly hybridized with AI in ways that feel unfamiliar yet uncanny in its resemblance to ourselves. Contrary to the metaphor of “AI hallucination,” which risks anthropomorphizing generative AI tools and distorting moral judgement, “the unhomely” brings attention to the phenomenological dimensions of abjection experienced from our technologies and better approximates a root for collective action. In this way, thinking through “the unhomely” offers the possibility of destabilizing oppositions and transforming them into more complex matter. In this chapter, we propose to enact the tactical strategy of “amok,” a practice originating from Malaysian mythology that privileges Indigenous relationalities that are embodied, multivocal, and land-based. Reclaiming amok, a term that British colonialists used to pathologize Indigenous Malay people as affected by a culture-bound psychosis, is to make apparent the limitations of AI by resisting the deceit, malpractice, and negligence that deny the lived realities of the global majority and the long-standing impacts of colonial history. This chapter proposes a pragmatic toolkit for engaging with agential AI and open-sourced tools using an Indigenous protocol. We design a multi-agent AI framework using large-language models (LLMs) and inter-dependency networks to facilitate a multi-species approach to co-creation, collective imagining, and participatory AI. The use of open-sourced tools and local and distributed computing can strengthen collective power and form sociotechnical imaginaries at the grassroots and relational level. Moreover, working through “the unhomeliness” of AI at both a conceptual and pragmatic level grounds discourse away from a tendency to rehash techno-Orientalist divides of Cold War oppositions and anxieties, instead actively co-creating a vision for a global, digital commons and post-nationalist models for AI governance. This chapter concludes with a photography collection that visualizes an anthropology of peoples that transforms the conceptual dearth of “the unhomely” into agentic mythologies of Indigenous life. In doing so, we also propose an alternative generative AI stack that is based on agency (over data and image), localization (of archives and computation), and co-creation that integrates a fabulatory practice for survival.
